Add S3 storage and Parquet investigation (#7)
kyma-incubator/compass: docs/storage/s3/parquet.md

> # Apache Parquet

Reviewer: I don't see evaluation of minio and Parquet usage in the context of the providers. Please add

Author: Hmm, Minio doesn't have anything to do with that, as it would only download/upload a file. BTW Minio supports S3 select.

> There is idea to use Apache Parquet for storing group relations between Runtime and the Application.

Reviewer: I just missing some data structure in S3 itself, something similar you did for s3 documentation. About Parquet file and where specs are stored.

Author: Done

Apache Parquet is a column-oriented data storage format, which could be used to hold the needed pieces of information. It would be stored on the root of the S3 bucket. 

### Pros

1. **Efficient data store**

    Very good compression. For example, if CSV file is as big as 1 TB, the data stored in Parquet file has 130 GB.

1. **Good performance**
    
    Fetching specific column values doesn't need reading the entire raw data.

### Cons

1. **Doing queries**

    For Golang, we have [parquet-go](https://github.com/xitongsys/parquet-go) library, which handles read and writes of the `parquet` file.

    In order to do queries in Apache Parquet, we would need a query engine, such as [Apache Drill](https://drill.apache.org/), which is written in Java.

    If we wanted to avoid this engine, in our use case, we would need to define group names and application names as columns.

1. **Concurrent write into the same file**

>     We could enable bucket files versioning (for example, in [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil/addlhelp/ObjectVersioningandConcurrencyControl)). However, we would need to implement a mechanism to always fetch the latest version of the file and retry saving until success.

Reviewer: It's not an option, that's one of the requirement that we need to keep previous revisions of APIs, docs etc

Author: In parquet file we wouldn't store APIs, docs, etc. - just info about all labels, and labels for all runtimes and apps

- all labels
- all applications with a specific label
- all runtimes with a specific label
- all labels with a specific key

However, all read/write operations would need multiple S3 requests to handle them. For example:

To read all runtimes (when we have 10 of them), we would need to:
- fetch list of the `runtimes` directory (1 request)
- for every runtime, we would need to download `data.json` file (10 requests)
- download `db.parquet` file (1 request), query labels for all runtimes and merge the results above with data

We could use similar approach to the one described [here](./README.md), by writing labels for runtimes and applications as files under `{tenant_id}/{applications or runtimes}/{application_id or runtime_id}/` directory.

### Pros

1. **Efficient data store**

    Very good compression. For example, if CSV file is as big as 1 TB, the data stored in Parquet file has 130 GB.

1. **Good performance for reading data**
    
    Fetching specific column values doesn't need reading the entire raw data.

### Cons

1. **Doing queries**

>     For Golang, we have [parquet-go](https://github.com/xitongsys/parquet-go) library, which handles read and writes of the `parquet` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For Golang, we have [parquet-go](https://github.com/xitongsys/parquet-go) library, which handles the reading and writing of the `parquet` file.
```

    In order to do queries in Apache Parquet, we would need a query engine, such as [Apache Drill](https://drill.apache.org/), which is written in Java.

>     If we wanted to avoid this engine, in our use case, we would need to rethink how to structure the data, to be able to cover our all use cases with just the ability to read a specific column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If we wanted to avoid using this engine. We would need to rethink how to structure the data, to be able to cover all our use cases with just the ability to read a specific column.
```

1. **Concurrent write into the same file**

>     We could enable bucket files versioning (for example, in [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil/addlhelp/ObjectVersioningandConcurrencyControl)). However, we would need to implement a mechanism to always fetch the latest version of the file and retry saving until success.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    We could enable bucket files versioning (for example, in [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil/addlhelp/ObjectVersioningandConcurrencyControl)). However, we would need to implement a mechanism to always fetch the latest version of the file and retry saving until it is successful.
```

 
1. **Time-consuming operations**

>     For example, every time the user adds an application to a group, we would need to download `parquet` file, modify it and then upload modified version. We can't implement caching as we always need latest version of this file, especially when we will use Cross-region replicas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For example, every time a user adds an application to a group, we would need to download the `parquet` file, modify it and then upload the modified version. We can't implement caching as we always need the latest version of this file, especially when we will use Cross-region replicas.
```

    However, there is S3 Select available on AWS for [Parquet](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2018/09/amazon-s3-announces-new-features-for-s3-select/), which would eliminate the need to download the whole file for read-only operations. Minio supports S3 Select. Still, writing will always mean that we need to download the file.

### Summary

> The Apache Parquet is good in different use case, when storing big amount of data with complex structure. In our case, we can store labels using standard S3 capabilities: creating and removing files and directories. We can create a directory structure on S3 to enable querying by groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Apache Parquet is a good solution for a different use case - when storing a big amount of data with complex structure. In our case, we can store labels using standard S3 capabilities: creating and removing files and directories. We can create a directory structure on S3 to enable querying by groups.
```

    └── db.parquet
    ...
    ```

To minimize the file, the `db.parquet` file would store all details regarding labels for runtimes and applications. We would do querys for:
- all labels
- all applications with a specific label
- all runtimes with a specific label
- all labels with a specific key

However, all read/write operations would need multiple S3 requests to handle them. For example:

To read all runtimes (when we have 10 of them), we would need to:
- fetch list of the `runtimes` directory (1 request)
- for every runtime, we would need to download `data.json` file (10 requests)
- download `db.parquet` file (1 request), query labels for all runtimes and merge the results above with data

We could use similar approach to the one described [here](./README.md), by writing labels for runtimes and applications as files under `{tenant_id}/{applications or runtimes}/{application_id or runtime_id}/` directory.

### Pros

1. **Efficient data store**

    Very good compression. For example, if CSV file is as big as 1 TB, the data stored in Parquet file has 130 GB.

1. **Good performance**
    
    Fetching specific column values doesn't need reading the entire raw data.

> ### Cons

Reviewer 3: If for some reason our parquet file would be 100 GB large, and we wanted to apply any change to it, I think we would have to:
1. Download 100 GB file
2. Uncompress the file
3. Apply our changes
4. Compress the file
5. Upload 100 GB file to replace the old one

Even if we want to focus on optimizing read operations this seems to me like a pretty big problem, not only because we need to transfer large file two times over the internet, but also because of the implied space requirements. I'm also worried the compression/uncompression operations will be costly.

In case we have to uncompress the whole file, it would take 1 TB of management plane space during this process. If, for example, two or more users decide to modify a label at the same time this number will multiply.

According to answers in [this post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28837456/updating-values-in-apache-parquet-file/) it might be possible to uncompress only a part of parquet file but we would either need to partition the file (effectively use multiple parquet files instead of one) or use row groups.

1. **Doing queries**

    For Golang, we have [parquet-go](https://github.com/xitongsys/parquet-go) library, which handles read and writes of the `parquet` file.

>     In order to do queries in Apache Parquet, we would need a query engine, such as [Apache Drill](https://drill.apache.org/), which is written in Java.

Reviewer 4: https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2018/12/amazon-s3-announces-parquet-output-format-for-inventory/

Author: On Amazon we can use S3 Select to do queries without need to download the whole file. It is written in the "Time-consuming operations" section.
